there's also something important jordan
in understanding that at least that the
traditional churches at least the
liturgical churches that
you don't you don't them like for
example in the orthodox church they
always say if the sermon is more than 15
minutes it's pride
it's like keep your sermons as short as
possible because you're not there to
obviously
obviously guilty of that you're not
you're not there i mean it's
propositional understanding is fine but
it's participatory like church is
participatory so you enter into the
church you say like you imagine an
orthodox church even a traditional
catholic church you have a space which
is structured as the hierarchy
ontological hierarchy of being and then
you see these images which are patterned
and are revealing to you these mysteries
that are beyond words and then you
participate in the singing these
processions and it is it is a
participative thing and so
if you go there to kind of
get knowledge
it's not the same type of of practice
and as you're singing these songs and as
you're hearing these hymns all of a
sudden two images connect together and
all of a sudden you know these things
start to connect inside you in somewhat
in almost a kind of
super rational way
and the insights you get sometimes your
heart you have difficulty explaining
them but they're very deep and they're
they're embodied as you bow down as you
kneel as you eat the body and and and
blood of christ these are these are
different types of participation than
just and jonathan
i'm totally in agreement with you and
what did we do in our catholic churches
in the west the same time we were
presenting the bible in this in this
flattened out historical critical way we
also were flattening out our churches
emptying out our churches of just that
mystical cosmic symbolism the angels the
saints color uh the cosmic dimension and
we flattened them out and we made them
like you know empty meeting spaces
[Music]
hello everybody
i'm pleased today to have the
opportunity
to speak with
people
that some of you will be familiar with
they've been guests on my
podcast and youtube channel
uh sometimes multiple times
it's always been interesting to me and
to some of you at least according to the
comments i thought it would be very
interesting to get these three gentlemen
together with me and
talk about meaning uh what meaning means
what religious meaning means more
specifically and uh
we're hoping to have a free-flowing
conversation to investigate that
question from
psychological theological and personal
perspectives and so i'm happy to have
john verveiki
professor at the university of toronto
bishop barron who's a bishop
bishop robert baron and jonathan pajo
who's an orthodox christian icon carver
and and now as well a
frequent youtube commentator and public
speaker and uh
these men i i found my conversations
with them always
stretched my mind and taught me new
things and made me think and so
i thought we'd see what we could all do
together so welcome gentlemen it's a
pleasure to have you here thank you
thanks for having me
thank you very much yeah
john i'll start with you so i'm going to
ask you two questions
i'm going to ask you what you think
meaning means
what does the term mean what does it
signify and then
there's some implicit idea i suppose
that meaning has different depths and
that religious meaning is among the
deepest of depths and
i'd like you to riff on that we'll go
from man to man to do that then we'll
we'll start talking as if it's a
conversation
great thanks again for inviting me and
uh it's a great pleasure to be here it's
great to see you again jonathan and it's
a pleasure meeting you bishop
um
so uh there's a question and as you said
quite correctly that's at the center of
a lot of my work and also uh i guess my
own personal uh project
i take it when we're talking about
meaning in this context uh we're using
meaning as a metaphor
we're talking about something
similar to the way a sentence works it
has an intelligibility to it that
connects us to the world in some
important ways so that we can interact
with the world and so we can be informed
by the world
and that what we're talking about when
we're talking about meaning when when
in the sense of meaning in life not just
the meaning of a sentence
the question to ask is what is that
metaphor pointing to
so i've put forth the proposal
that what that metaphor is pointing to
is something that's fundamental to our
cognitive agency um and jordan's this is
something you and i have talked about
before in other contexts
which is the problem of relevance
realization
which is this deep profound problem at
the heart of cognitive science you find
at the heart of ai
mania issues within cognitive psychology
categorization communication and this is
of all of the information available to
me
how do i zero in on the relevant
information of all of the information
available in my long-term memory and all
the potential ways i could combine them
how do i how do i connect and zero in on
the relevant information out of all the
possible
uh courses of actions i could undertake
the way i could sequence various things
together how do i select the appropriate
sequence of actions how do i do that
and and and the thing that's that's
mysterious and wonderful and perplexing
and intriguing and i'm obsessed about is
we're doing it all right now and we're
doing it like this
and and it's not a cold calculation
uh you know i'm standing out i'm salient
there's an element of arousal there's
affect you're caring about some
information and you're backgrounding and
ignoring other information so it's this
very affectively laden connectedness
because the idea of relevance
realization is it's not relevance is it
isn't in the head it isn't in the world
it's in a proper real relation between
the embodied brain and the world this is
what's known as embodied cognition this
is the kind of cognitive science
i um i'm involved in so the idea is
this is a dynamical self-organizing
process and you can feel it a little bit
at work right now as i'm talking part of
your attention wants to drift away and
think about other things right this is
like variation in evolution another part
of your attention is focusing in and
selecting and you're constantly varying
and selecting and you're evolving in
this dynamically coupled fashion a
salience landscape that makes you feel
that you're here now in this particular
state of consciousness in this
situational awareness so you're deeply
fundamentally connected and that is
deeply central to your cognitive agency
if you don't have that you're not a
cognitive agent and this is of course
one of the things that has the whole
project of artificial intelligence has
disclosed we thought that intelligence
was mostly about propositional
manipulation right getting you know sort
of coherence and instead know this
dynamical embodied evolving
connectedness
is very central
uh to our cognitive agency so much so
that it stands to good reason that it is
a core
motivational
feature and dimension of our whole
agency so i i talk about meaning in life
and i use the word and i use it
deliberately um but i hope it's not
offensively i use the word religio to
discuss to
describe this connection because that's
one of the that's the meaning of religio
to bind together it's one of the
purported etymological origins of the
word religion and that allows me to now
segue into
uh what i would want to say religious
meaning is so i think when we are
here's a metaphor
and i often use this a lot of our a lot
of the time our mental framing is
transparent to us like my glasses we're
looking through it and by means of it
but there are times when i need to step
back and consider this is what you do in
mindfulness practices i need to consider
that mental framing and i might want to
not only consider it i might want to
educate it i want i might want to
celebrate it so normally religio is
transparent to us and and therefore we
are it affords our agency but there are
things we do where we step back
and we try to become more directly aware
of religio in order to educate it
perhaps correct it improve it celebrate
it and when we're doing that in a way
that
creates
what i i call a reciprocal opening the
opposite of what happens in addiction
reciprocal opening is my agency is
opening up the world is opening up and
i'm experiencing this
inexhaustible fount of emerging
intelligibility that's not just
conceptual but is this
about this religio for me that's the
experience of sacredness and so when
when religio
when we we when we focus upon religio
rather than focus through it
in order to accentuate it and accelerate
it so that we can come into the deepest
mutual resonance between ourselves and
the depths of reality uh that for me is
what religious meaning would be the
religio about the sacred so that would
be my initial answer i hope that was
helpful
okay so
so i'm going to comment on that and i'll
make my comments about this question
because i'm also a psychologist and then
we'll move to we'll move to
to you to you guys to jonathan and to
bishop aaron
so if you think
you're uh when you look at the world
there's a central point of focus
and that's mediated by your fovea and
that's at the back of your that's on
your retina in the center
essentially and
you'll notice that when you zoom your
eyes on inside on something that becomes
very clear it's a very small area that
becomes very clear and then you'll
notice that around that area it's less
and less and less clear until it fades
out into nothingness and the nothingness
you don't even perceive it's just not
there and so it's high resolution in the
center lower lower lower lower way out
here in the periphery you actually don't
even see color
you can't tell that but you don't and
you're better at detecting motion
because maybe you should look at moving
things and then the world vanishes
so and that's sort of what that's very
much like what consciousness is
and and your and and also it's
associated with meaning because you you
focus your fovea on what's most
meaningful
and those foveal cells
are tremendously connected into the
visual cortex that that
it takes a lot of brain to make those
that fovea work and that's why it's such
a small area and we move it around
instead of just having a retina that's
all fovea we'd have to have a brain like
this big to manage that
so okay so that's sort of like a
metaphor for consciousness and meaning
and then i want to layer something on
top of that metaphor so
and this is something like the
relationship between the conscious and
the unconscious and also the
relationship between narratives and
consciousness and consciousness and
unconsciousness so
i'm looking at say john right now i'm
looking at his eyes because that's what
you do when you converse with someone
and i'm doing that because we're having
a conversation and so i have this little
frame of reference that helps me realize
what's relevant
right now my goal is to have an
interesting conversation and i'm picking
out the targets that i presume are
relevant to that goal and then
but then you might ask yourself well why
that goal
and then so that
net that story that's guiding me
is nested in a larger story which is
well maybe i'm an educator and a
communicator and i'd like to bring this
knowledge to myself but also to other
people and then outside of that is
another story which is well why am i
doing that and well it's because i think
that
it's in an interesting thing to do and
it's a meaningful and useful thing to do
but
it'll help educate people and maybe
that'll make the world a slightly better
place in some manner and then outside of
that there's another presumption which
is well why would i bother trying to
make the world
a better place and maybe that's because
well
because not suffering is better than
suffering and because i think that
that's a moral way to act and i would
like to act in a moral manner and then
outside of that there's yet another
story which is well
and that's where you start to shade into
the religious it's like who exactly am i
imitating when i enact that morality
and i think that's where we can have a
particularly interesting discussion
because i would say psychologically
that
implicit figure at the outer edge of the
narrative structuring of my
consciousness and meaning realization
that would be something that's
psychologically equivalent to
the the hero of heroes
in some sense that would be culture free
but in our culture in the
judeo-christian culture
that figure is christ
and so then there's a then there's a
this is independent of religious belief
as far as i'm concerned
now there's an interesting relationship
with formal religious belief but i think
this is the way it works psychologically
and i got some of this from studying
neuroscience the same sorts of things
john is studying but some of it from
studying you and you know you prop
proposed that
at the very least speaking
psychologically christ is the symbol of
the self and what he meant by that is
that christ is the symbolic realization
of our culture's determination of the
embodiment of the ideal and it's an
image and it grips us it's the thing we
imitate
or we fight against we're in that
whether we like it or not and then the
question becomes for me
okay that's a psychological truth
but it it can also be a metaphysical
claim
and an ontological claim
and that and that's where this starts to
shade into
the religious per se
so
that's it for me so bishop do you want
to take it from there
yeah uh thank you first of all everybody
thank you and jonathan and john to meet
you for the first time at least
virtually i've met jordan twice now
virtually but good to be with all of you
you're all canadians right all of you
are canadian born because all i can
think of
as you both were talking about loner
again i'll get maybe back to him but one
of my favorite philosophers the canadian
jesuit lonergan came to my mind a lot
but to answer the opening question
i guess i would say meaning is
to be in a purposive relationship to a
value
so i think certain values appear
epistemic values of the the true
moral values
and aesthetic values so the true the
good and the beautiful right the three
transcendental properties of being and i
think those values appear and i really
like what you're saying too both of you
about attention
what gets our attention what draws our
consciousness
why like you know william james says the
the mind is like a bird that flies and
it perches for time it looks and then it
flies again
why does it focus on certain things and
we call those values i would say and a
meaningful life is one that's lived in a
purposive relationship to values it's
seeking them in a very concentrated way
now what's religious value
is a life lived in purpose of
relationship to
the supreme value the su mumbonum to the
the source
of goodness truth and beauty which is
god
and you know what came to my mind as you
were talking jordan was
two things from aquinas
one is
probably the most uh misunderstood and
overlooked of his famous five arguments
is the fourth argument and it's the most
platonic of the of the five he's usually
aristotelian in form aquinas but number
four is platonic and what he says is
we experience things in the world as
more or less true good and beautiful
so just what i was saying we notice
values and we also notice them ordered
hierarchically they're some that's
that's truer that's better that's more
beautiful then thomas says we only can
make that calculation
in implicit relationship to something we
consider highest in goodness truth and
beauty and the way it's misunderstood is
people think oh i guess well there's a
tall building there's a taller building
and boy there's the tallest building
there must be some absolutely tall
building but he's not talking about
something as trivial as that he's
talking about the properties of being
the good the true and the beautiful and
being is by its very nature unlimited
so therefore it's true that we make
those calculations we see those
hierarchies
only finally in relationship to
an unconditioned i can use the more
modern kind of kantian language some
unconditioned form of goodness truth and
beauty
that's religious
meaning it seems to me is to be in
purposive relationship to that the other
thing from aquinas and i think jordan
you and i talked about it last time we
were together i love what you did there
because that's an implicit argument for
god it's in the
second part of the summa
from final causality uh
every time i make an act of the will i'm
seeking a good i'm seeking a value of
some kind
but as you say quite correctly and
that's just like aquinas that value
nests in a higher value which nests and
is still higher value
and so i can't go on indefinitely that
would make my act of the will incoherent
so i've got to come finally to some
sumim bonum some supreme value that's
motivating me
that's religious meaning it seems to me
is now to be in relationship to
this most alluring
horizon
of all of desire now there's lonergan
again my canadian
reference
to be in relation to god lonergan said
is to want to know everything about
everything so that's the the value the
epistemic value of the truth but now in
its unconditioned form i want to know
everything about everything we call that
in religious language the beatific
vision or i want not just this
particular good so i'm talking to the
three of you now which i think is a good
but it's nesting as you say in a higher
good and it's still higher good and so
finally i want not just this particular
good
i want goodness itself
that's a religious relationship so i
guess that's how i'd approach it maybe
piggybacking a bit on what you both said
jonathan
i think i mean i it's interesting
because i by the way thank you for
making me last and this uh
stacking up on everything that everybody
said but
uh
i think that what's interesting in what
john said in terms of relevant
realization and in terms of this
hierarchy of values that
both uh jordan and bishop baron brought
up the thing that i might add at least
in my perception is that
first of all these this pattern
recognition that we engage with and this
hierarchy of values and just hierarchies
in general
they really are teleological in the way
that bishop baron said that is that the
reason why we perceive hierarchy is
because we're always judging or
perceiving or trying to evaluate whether
something
is good
and
but the other thing that this does in
terms of so it binds reality together
right so you're looking at something and
you want to evaluate the apple and this
this desire makes you see the pattern of
the apple because you have to engage
with it you have to relate to it you
have to eat it so because you have to
eat the apple that's why you see it and
that's why you can perceive it and
that's why you're evaluating it but this
pattern let's say a binding of religio
that john mentioned it stacks up
so until now we've actually talked
mostly about individual
relationship this individual
relationship with the field the being
that presents itself to us the
individual relationship with the the
ultimate good but it also does something
else is that it stacks up people
together it binds us together as well
and that's in terms of meaning of
religion in a broader sense that can
also kind of help you understand
religious practice
why we get together why we sing together
why we celebrate as john mentioned why
do we celebrate together because
when you see the apple and you see a
good apple you're
implicitly celebrating it
it every act of recognition of a good
is going to be a mini celebration but
that stacks up together in terms of
people gathering and singing and and
processing and doing all the things we
do
in order to celebrate the highest good
and
let me let me just just intersperse
something there from a psychological
perspective well that idea of of the
mini celebration
so
there's a technical reason for that in
some sense so let's say you specify a
goal and that goal is is nested inside
the value harkey that we've already
described
and so now you're pursuing something of
value if you see something that leads
you down the pathway to that value
that produces positive emotion
technically speaking that's
dopaminergically mediated and and so
that's there's psychological there's a
fundamental neuroscientific reality
underneath the idea that to perceive
something good in relationship to a
higher good is a celebration and that is
it is definitely that
that imbues our life with a sense of
positive meaning and i mean that
directly like meaning is derived from
this nested hierarchy and then the
perception of
of valued
what would you what the
the perceptions of values that lead us
down that pathway without that there is
no positive emotion in in my in my
understanding of it
and so
the last thing i might want to say is
that so in the same way that the world
reveals itself to us as this hierarchy
of the good
in the same way that that we see that we
it also reveals to reveals itself to us
cosmically that's why i'm saying it
stacks up and that's why there are
these that's why there are temples
that's why there are there's the law of
moses that was received on the top of
the mountain that there is a cosmic
revelation of the same pattern that you
encounter as an individual which is in
inescapable as an individual and so that
is what ends up creating these
revelations of you know of being into
the world and binding us together as a
as a body instead of just these
disparate individuals and as jordan said
it's very
appropriate to discuss you know what are
these revelations and what do they look
like and and
of these revelations which is the one
that binds the most reality together
into itself and i think that that is
when the the image of christ as
being god man as going all the way down
into death as reaching to the highest
summit as as you know
we we could i don't want to go into a
story too much but jordan you know that
there's a
most of christ's story seems to go to
the limit of storytelling in all the
aspects in which it goes right it's like
christ doesn't just go down into the
underworld and resurrect when he comes
back up the underworld is empty and
death is defeated and that's the end and
so it's like that for almost every
aspect of christ's story where he
reaches the limit of storytelling uh and
so in that way it's it's a it's it is
ends up just being the fact that we
recognize it that we've brought it
together that we've celebrated it means
that it is part of this kind of cosmic
revelation
and it's something that we can look at
objectively and talk about and discuss
but it's definitely there in our story
as a as europeans as you know as
westerners and and we've discounted it
completely but i think we're at a point
now with this meeting crisis where we
can
go back and reevaluate it and understand
it as this
the possibility of these relevant
realization patterns stacking up beyond
the individual let's say
okay so so i want to comment on that
revelation idea i'm going to go a little
sideways here and so you might say that
the standard
view of the world now is that there's an
objective reality that's devoid that's
made out of think material things that's
the most appropriate way to
conceptualize it
it's made out of objective things
they exist independently of
consciousness
and we project a value structure onto
them
and with and when we die let's say when
there is no human consciousness that
value structure is there's no value
structure like that there and so it's
epithelial and evanescent it's not a
fundamental part of objective reality
outside of subjectivity so now there's a
couple of problems with that viewpoint i
would say
first of all it isn't obvious to me that
we see objects
we see patterns it's not obvious that we
see
it's it i you could make a strong case
um
and this was made by
a man who wrote uh uh ecological
approach to visual perception that what
we perceive first and foremost aren't
objects me we perceive meaning
we perceive a falling off place if we
get too near a cliff and even a
six-month-old will perceive that
children infants
very very young perceive beauty they
perceive symmetry they perceive value
and so we don't perceive the object and
obviously project the meaning
you can't say that that's the way the
neuroscience of perception has laid out
the world
and then the last thing is is that the
problem with the idea that we
merely project meaning onto a
meaningless objective world is that
meaning is disclosed to us in ways that
we can't predict
and that are outside of our
are what would outside of
it
new knowledge that we don't have can be
revealed to us through the perception of
value it's not it's not obvious how we
can project that and then also have
something new revealed at the same time
so meaning is disclosed to us
and the phenomenologists
phenomenological psychologists made much
of this in the
like first third of the 20th century
uh following heidegger so
so anyways i'm going to leave it at that
can i just jump in i go back here to
dietrich von hildebrand's famous
distinction between the merely
subjectively satisfying and the
objectively valuable
and i mean he certainly understood the
play between the subjective and the
objective and all the classical
philosophers knew that aquinas certainly
knew it i mean
the mind and the intelligible form light
up each other he said i mean each each
one illumines the other so
i i don't think the pre-modern people
had the sense of you know sharp
demarcation of the two nevertheless
there was a distinction i think jordan
you're hitting at it there we we feel
the distinction between the merely
subjectively satisfying and the
objectively valuable the objectively
valuable addresses me it
it rearranges me it's not something that
i've i've configured or i've projected
it
it's turned me upside down i think we've
all had that experience there was an
article in rolling stone years ago and
it asked a number of the famous rock and
rollers what was the first
song that rocked your world and i
remember liking the formulation of that
question because it didn't say what's
the first song you liked
it was the first song that changed you
that rearranged your consciousness and i
can i can name that very clearly my own
case was bob dylan's like a rolling
stone it wasn't the first song i liked
but it was the first song that rocked my
world and rearranged me and i think
that's what real value is like now bring
it to the religious level
now we're in a biblical kind of
framework where you know uh it's not you
who've chosen me it's i who've chosen
you and now when the suma bonum isn't
just dumbly out there waiting for us to
rise up through some contemplative
exercise because i mean the sumabonum
plato and platinus and khan could all
say yeah there's assuming bonum but when
it really gets interesting to me is when
the sumimbonum is after me the
psumabonum is trying to find me and is
breaking into my
reluctant and recalcitrant consciousness
and now you're talking about religious
revelation but it has to do with that
that
i don't know stunning objectivity the
the good
think of iris murdock there she was so
strong on that theme that the good
confronts us and it changes us and it
doesn't let us go and um religious
revelation is the sort of
ultimate expression of that it seems to
me
i i i i
i
this is
something with which i'm in significant
agreement but i think it's uh uh also
important to wonder
uh together why this has become so
problematic uh i think we're in a
meeting crisis so yeah um and i think we
should remember
you know the factor i mean so bishop you
invoked aristotle's conformity theory uh
and of course that was replaced by a
representational theory of knowledge a
propositional representational theory
for various reasons one was trying to
account for the copernican revolution
etc we had nominalism that said those
patterns aren't out in the world and
that's why i keep saying jonathan is
more radical than he sometimes realizes
because he's challenging a fundamental
uh nominalism in his work yeah um and
contest
is the culmination of that the real
patterns are only in your mind and we
right we have no access to the world and
there's reasons why we got there
and and then of course there are you
know related issues
around ideas of levels of being uh which
is uh you know i think you're right
all of you have said this and i and this
is you know central to
the phenomenology of intelligibility but
it seems to be you know contradicted
uh by something that you know starts
with scotus and goes through occam and
goes into the heart of the scientific
revolution is there's no such thing
as levels this this is not a
reality just is you know existence isn't
a predicate
and those kinds of things now i'm not
i'm not mentioning these things to
espouse them i'm mentioning them to try
and indicate there have been very
profound
philosophical historical developments
that have challenged
this uh phenomenology
um and that part of the task um well
sorry i don't want to be presumptuous
part of what i see my task of being
is to try and take the very best of
science and
answer all of those challenges in a way
that restores confidence
in the hierarchies of intelligibility
and the phenomenology of connectedness
now that's one thing i'd want to say the
second thing now why are you doing that
why why are you called to do that john
do you think well i'm called to do that
because um
well this is how i i i i put it to my
students who take my introduction to
cognitive science
we have a scientific world view
in which science
and the scientists and their meaning
making have no proper ontological place
we are the whole science and and we are
the black hole within this brutal view
that dominates us and let's let let's be
very clear and this is heidegger's point
domination is not just id i ideational
or even ideological it is woven into the
fabric of our technology the ways we
communicate uh it's it's woven into our
cognitive grammar we talk about like
even the way that we divide subjective
in an objective one of gibson's points
right jordan you mentioned gibson is the
notion of an affordance and an
affordance is not properly objective or
subjective the graspability of this cup
is not a feature of the cup it's not a
subjective feature of me it's a real
relation between me
and so i mean gibson
again gibson's work is really profound
this is why it gets taken up into 40
cargo science he's trying to he's trying
to challenge this grammar and there's a
whole bunch of us i don't want to i'm in
no way a singular
um
individual although i might be a bizarre
one but i i mean i represent a lot of
people who are feeling called to the
fact that this this
lack of ontological placement and the
fact how and the way it ramifies through
you know our ontological technological
structure and our cultural cognitive
grammar the the very
ways we think
is causing causing massive suffering
um so yes
absolutely right i'm clear about that a
bit i'm still unclear about exactly what
you mean what is this black hole this is
i mean is this the insistence on the
absolute distinction between the
subjective and the object oh no like
what is this black okay so i what is
well what i meant i mean it's related to
that but what i was what i was directly
referring to at the black hole is that
science
the science exists
okay if it is what kind of entity is it
and tell me using physics or chemistry
or even biology
use just though that ontology and those
methodology tell me what science is and
tell me how it has the status to make
the claims it does and tell me how
science is related to meaning and truth
and how do meaning and truth fit into
the scientific worldview they're
presupposed by that worldview but they
have no proper place within it that's
what i mean so whenever we're doing the
science and saying this this is what the
world is we are absenting ourselves from
it we have no home
in which we are properly situated and i
think that ramifies through everything
we think say and do
to each other and with each other in a
profoundly corrosive way that's what i
mean by the meaning
okay what's the profound it's caused
enormous suffering it causes enormous
suffering so i mean like i was talking
to somebody just the other day in
australia
and there are more deaths uh by suicide
in australia right now than copenhagen
yeah
and australia is one of the epitomes of
you know the best countries in the world
affluent liberal democracy not much
conflict been at peace for a long time
blah blah blah blah all the things that
the enlightenment said would bring in
unending happiness and what you have is
spiking in suicide you have the
loneliness
epidemic you have the addiction epidemic
you have people
choosing to learn live in a virtual
world rather than the real world
you have all of these things that are
pointing to the fact that there's a
significant stressor you have positive
responses too you have the mindfulness
revolution you have the resuscitation of
ancient you know uh wisdom philosophies
like stoicism you you have uh you know
if you have the work of people like
right here i mean one of the things and
i hope jonathan takes this as compliment
because he knows
how highly i think of him i think one of
the things that jonathan is doing with
his work is responding to this suffering
in the meaning crisis we were drawn to
each other because we both saw the
zombie as a as a mythological represent
the culture was saying to itself we're
suffering a meeting crisis i'm talking
too much i'm going to stop
jordan if we go back to the image that
you use which is the idea that we
project meaning on an objective world
already you can see the alienation that
is bound up in that very proposition
which is okay so where are we then we're
not in the world we're like these these
kind of ghosts that are floating above
reality like and where does that come
from like where does that floating
intelligence come from that's able to
separate itself so completely from the
world that that it's able to just
analyze it objectively and then project
and then realize that realize that it's
projecting subjective meaning on top of
it and so when we once i think that some
of the work that john's been doing and
some of the work that you've been doing
is to realize this embodied
reality is that we are in the world and
we are part and parcel of the manner in
which meaning even the world itself
discloses itself we people who think
they can imagine the world outside of
human consciousness like where are they
where are these signs where are they
standing that they can tell us that we
are projecting meaning unto the world
are they like gods you know up in the up
and up in the world they would never say
that they've taken themselves out of the
equation and so coming back into reality
and understanding
this image of communion for example like
a lot of the images that john is is
saying is really this image of communion
that meaning is relational that it's
communal that it's all these things that
can help us even understand once again
what the religious patterns are for is
to just ho it's actually holding reality
together and once we've once we've
broken that then we get this increasing
alienation we get the increasing
fragmentation you know the suburbs as
just the spread of people that don't
know each other they don't have common
projects that have nothing in common
except that they're living in in a in
just this equal space and so this kind
of reducing of hierarchy in the world
that they that the scientists wanted to
happen it's happened now to us
and everything's breaking apart and
nobody can hear each other and and it's
a it's a direct consequence of that
thinking
yeah there's a lot that's just
stimulating my thinking here and one is
i'm again i love the sciences but i hate
scientism and scientism is all over the
place in our culture i deal with it all
the time in my evangelical work hearing
from not just younger people from
everybody in our culture that science is
the
uh criterion you know i i saw a video
john i think you and jordan were talking
to brett weinstein and it was about i
don't know maybe something along these
lines but he made very articulately
intelligently but made the argument that
the sciences the physical sciences
belong in the supreme position vis-a-vis
all forms of human knowing and i'm
shouting at the screen no
no that's exactly where they don't
belong and that's a form of scientism uh
the medieval is called theology like the
queen of the sciences well at least
you're that's more appropriate you're
talking about god and the sumeum bonum
having some kind of supremacy i also go
right back to the classical world
the sciences from a platonic standpoint
they're terrific but you're just getting
ever more precise
accounts of the cave
right of the images the fleeting even
essen images of the world
to rise to higher forms of consciousness
by way of mathematics first of all then
then to the higher forms of philosophy
and metaphysics aristotle you know
moving from physics to mathematics to
metaphysics
it's not to denigrate for a second the
sciences aristotle is the founder of
many ways of physics
but it is to say there's a hierarchy
again there's an epistemic hierarchy and
science physical science does not belong
at the top of it when it does something
goes really wrong with the human spirit
and there's a there's a starvation of
the spirit
well
and it's hard to know
how to take that seriously like let's
say that's a fact there's a starvation
of the human spirit that's a fact well
is it a fact like
a fact that emerges from physics well
not exactly it's a different kind of
fact but
what happens if we ignore it well people
suffer and die
and
we don't use
the fact that in the absence of a
proposition
people suffer and die as an index of its
truth
not not from the scientific perspective
that that isn't the methodology of
science
but
that leaves us with this problem of of
meaning
it's sort of
delivered to us and it isn't something
it isn't obvious to me that science can
address it at all i mean sam harris and
other thinkers like harris have tried to
put the value
up
to to bring the domain of value within
the domain of science i i think it's
it's an effort that's doomed to failure
because i i don't think they're of the
same type i think that science by its
very nature excludes
it does everything it can to exclude
value except
john it leaves us with the problem you
described which is the problem that jung
addressed when he was tying the
development of empirical science back to
alchemy because and this goes back to
the idea of the hierarchies that we
started out with
you know
jung believed that
he was really curious about why people
ever became motivated to take things
apart like scientists did to concentrate
on the mind mute like that what dream
drove them what fantasies drove them and
for for jung it was he found that
fantasy in the thousands of years of
work on alchemy and the alchemical
notion was
there exists a substance
which eventually became a material
substance whose discovery would grant
upon its bearer
immortality perfect health and endless
wealth so the idea the dream was that
substance could be found in the material
world
and that was a deep deep unconscious
fantasy manifested in all sorts of
images all sorts of bizarre images that
jung had the genius to be able to
analyze and understand
he saw that as the dream that preceded
the development of science in in in
western culture thousands it took
thousands and thousands of years to
unfold this dream and scientists were
encapsulated within that dream whether
they knew it or not and so the prime
example would be newton who wrote much
more on alchemy than he did on physics
and so
and so john as scientists at least from
the union perspective let's say we're
necessarily
motivated by a narrative that we don't
understand scientifically to engage in
the scientific process per se and we're
so deeply possessed by that that it it
guides and moves our perceptions without
us as scientists even necessarily having
to be aware that we're participating in
that narrative
so to your point the whole enterprise is
driven by a dream
whose
reality can't be
encapsulated within the process itself
it's a very strange thing i think it's
very interesting uh that dream and and
and
and sort of the undercurrents of
development so substance goes back to
hypostasis but of course there's another
history of hypostasis which is into the
persons of the trinity which is a very
different history and so there's there's
no necessity that you go from hypostasis
the grounding of intelligibility to
materiality
and of course what happened right was
also the inversion of matter as pure
potential to that which resists and yeah
yes so and i think that's part of again
about how a history of how um you know
the the the reason was
was supplanted by will as the dominant
faculty by which humans uh understood
and identified themselves um i i would
like to say that um that's bound up with
a couple other strands um i i'm not
trying to do
i wish i could do exhaustive history
here but i took 50 hours to do it so i'm
not going to try and do it now um but
you know you you also have like people
like harris and others you have a
deductivism model right which is i i
whatever i can deduce from the science
is real but in the neoplatonic tradition
you also look at what is presupposed by
your sciences and that is also a proper
uh uh location for the real so i have to
presuppose right the the intelligibility
of the world in order to do science i
can't use science to establish
intelligibility and then if i if i'm
realistic about my science which i
better be because that's what scientists
seem to be doing i have to be realistic
about this intelligibility but that's in
the contradiction to the anomalous
presuppositions the flat ontology notice
notice the contradiction notice the
contradiction and reductionism so you
have this whole tradition that says
there are no levels of being get rid of
all that platonic stuff but the bottom
level is the really real level and all
the levels above it are false that is
exactly symmetrical to the upper level
is most real and everything uh coming
down from it is derivative there's no
deep difference this is part of the
point i've made between an emergentist
ontology it's it is hierarchical it has
levels and an emanationist it is
hierarchical and have levels
and so do you do you think dark and
selfish gene is an example of i think
the idea that you can explain things in
a purely bottom up fashion this is part
of the alchemical revolution it was like
and i think and and i agree with young
on this and maybe my interpretation is
slightly different
but you know
there was a predominance of you know
emanation and emanationismology coming
out of the neoplatonic tradition and we
needed to rediscover
we need to okay so
let me address that for a second drag
the christians in
because
one of them
one of the claims that one of the clint
yeah i know
one of the claims that
that jung made in his works on alchemy
which are very very difficult to
understand was that look um
the christian revolution took place and
spread across
well across what became christian cur
the christian cultures and the west
broadly speaking and
there was a um an offer of salvation
right of deliverance from suffering
and then
and and that and and the hope that
christ would return in the kingdom of
heaven would be established on earth or
or something to that end and
then thousands of years went by and the
disquiet grew as that wasn't revealed
and
the the the unconscious imagination
looking
to find a source of new knowledge that
could redress that
suffering and lack started to focus on
this emergent
this opposite emergent ontology that you
described said we we haven't paid
sufficient attention to the reality of
the material world maybe that's what
holds the key to the alleviation of our
suffering and so then there's a pull
away from the top down this top-down
hierarchical structure that christianity
had imposed in some sense or revealed
to the opposite and and now it's swung
way in the other direction
and so
could i just say one thing in the
defense of the neoplateness um which is
you know if you read aerogena and kuza
um you get to uh you get to uh uh and uh
gina's clear on this you get a
dialectical in the platonic sense not
the hegelian sentence in which the
emanation and the emergence completely
interpenetrate they're both needed they
then they interpenetrate each other and
i would argue that what's happening now
is your people are moving especially in
the philosophy of biology towards we
need bottom-up and top-down is you know
jordan this is rife through all of
cognitive psychology bottom-up top-down
thinking right and that's not just
specific to the mind i think it's never
spreading out as no no this is how we
should start to think about it but i
think a more proper reading especially
of the later neoplainteness points to
that heritage within neoplatonism itself
so it doesn't have to be something
necessarily foreign to christianity i
would at least argue no saint maximus is
a clearly at bottom up and top down at
the same time in saint max's cosmology
you have the notion that you know this
these revelations are both a communion
of love and also a revelation from above
and that there's absolutely no
contradiction between the elements
coming together and coagulating in in
this this relationship of love and in
expressing this divine principle or this
higher principle which is coming down
from uh from above and in terms of
jung's theory i mean i don't want to be
picky about it that he kind of imagine
this story you know how come he came
came very much from islam by the way it
had a lot of its development was was in
the islamic world even the word alchemy
is is a is a is not a it's not a western
word and so i i find it a little too
simplified to just say christians were
waiting for jesus and then they created
this this bottom up science there's a
deeper kind of transformation which
happened in the west
related to nominalism into a kind of
slow progression towards this separation
of heaven and earth we could call it
like this kind of ripping apart of the
of the two sides uh which kind of led
both to materialism and to all these
esoteric things that were going on at
the same time right it's not true that
materialism was on its own but there are
all these kind of esoteric developments
that were manifesting themselves we have
to remember that descartes spent his
whole life trying to become a
rosicrucian like these two things were
it's like a ripping a part of reality
that leads into the new age into all
this kind of
neo-spirituality and christianity's true
message is rather the incarnational one
it's the one that john said it's it
really is this binding of multiplicity
and unity the binding of of the
the emanational part and the this kind
of emergent part together and so if i
basically i'm sorry i i i
interrupted
no it's very stimulating stuff and i i
would add you know the structuring
element in the suma of aquinas is the
so-called exetus raditus right all
things coming out from god then all
things returning to god
and so god makes a world that's good
indeed very good but not perfect and
part of the drama of salvation which is
in the bible always cosmic not just
human not just personal
the drama of salvation is this wonderful
process of reading to us the return of
all things to god the coming together
from below if you want but under the you
know the the alluring power of god's
love so that's that's one observation
the second one about the sciences i mean
i agree with there's an army of scholars
that say the condition for the
possibility of the of the physical
sciences in the west was christianity
that is to say the fundamental
assumption that the world is not god if
you divinize the world you're not going
to experiment on it you're not going to
analyze it in this sort of objectivizing
way so the world is not god it's been
created therefore it can be experimented
upon it can be analyzed but then
secondly as we've all been saying in
different ways it is radically
intelligible not just in a superficial
way not just in certain parts but in
every nook and cranny the universe is
intelligible that's a very weird thing
the more you think about it why should
that be the case and of course it's
coming out i would argue of a christian
conception that the world did come forth
the bible puts it poetically as a great
act of speech meaning it's in it's
imbued with intelligibility from an
intelligent source but when you bring
intelligibility and non-divinity
together you get the rise of the of the
modern sciences so they're not the least
bit repugnant to christianity on the
contrary what is repugnant is this
scientism and you've all been hinting at
in different ways you know trace it to
people like descartes but i i'm with uh
john i'd go right back to don scotus and
and occam and the breakdown of a
participation metaphysics and when you
get this univocal conception of being
and following from that nominalism and i
would even dare say certain forms of
protestantism are very much conditioned
by that way of looking at things you get
a lot of the problems we're facing today
i'm for a recovery
of the pre-modern this wonderfully rich
pre-modern sense of um a participative
view of being
you know the world in god the world
reflecting god
not a world of separated things and god
being the supreme thing among them so
aquinas says that god is not the supreme
being he doesn't call him en sumum but
he calls them ipsum essay to be itself
so there's a whole view of reality that
that's implicit in that description of
god and it's that is repugnant to
scientism in its various forms uh and i
think that's the key to recovering a lot
of sense of religious meaning
i i really liked the invocation of the
participatory um part of what i've been
arguing
is
that
the cutting edge cognitive science
what's called for economy of science is
challenging
the reduction of knowing
uh to uh propositional knowing knowing
that something yeah okay
that what we're discovering and you can
even find you know specific kinds of
memory for each one of these there's
also procedural knowing there's knowing
how to do something the skills
there's perspectival knowing which is
knowing what it's like to be here
in this state of mind in this situation
giving me situational awareness and then
the deepest is uh participatory knowing
this is this is the way in which
we know by how we are conformed and
transformed by others by the world so
that our knowing of ourself and our
knowing of this so you see this of
course prototypically in the way you
know your beloved you don't know them
yeah by your skills or your proposition
of course you know them this way but
this is not the the essence of it the
essence of it is the way you know you
are conforming to that and you're being
transformed so your self-knowledge and
your knowledge of them are bound
together but these this is now becoming
these ways of talking about other kinds
of knowing and
and the way in which
um they you know are stored in different
kinds of memory right procedural memory
episodic memory that weird kind of
memory we call the self um this is now
coming to the fore but here's the point
i want to make
the point is
right we've suffered kind of a
propositional tyranny from occam on
where we reduced all of knowing to the
propositional and i would argue that
most of what i called religio is being
carried on by the procedural and the
perspectival and the participatory and
so that is in a fundamental way how it's
it's not just out there it's like right
in the guts of our spa of our
self-interpretation
yeah the the question i think one of the
questions is what
what is the ontological significance of
that let's say i mean one of the
leaving aside the
the truth or lack thereof of various
religious claims
one of the
weaknesses i believe of the rational
atheists position is that
first of all that their
argument is carried out almost entirely
in the propositional landscape they
treat religious
they treat religion as if it's a set of
propositions
that are in some sense
expressed in a manner contrary to this
propositions that constitute science
and then i think well wait wait a minute
guys you're missing the point here and
there's a propositional element to
religious claim and i often think that's
the weakest element of but but
what do you make of the fact that people
have
religious experiences
what do you make of that exactly when
you say well that's epic phenomenal it's
like well yeah is it really like are you
so sure about that so let me give you an
example so i talked to brian mararescu
and carl rock a while back and
maybe doing some investigation into the
ellucinian mysteries and
uh
marie rescue's book is predicated on the
idea that
what the greeks were doing was using a
an lsd spiked wine essentially to
produce a collective
mystical experience that and they had
technologies to harness that so it was
collective and that that constituted the
core of the illustinion mysteries and
that
enterprise was practiced by the ancient
greeks for thousands of years
continuously
and that that
experience was at the basis of the unity
of greek culture but more than that that
it was the fountain from which greek
wisdom flowed
and so
it's a revelatory hypothesis
by which i mean sorry it's a hypothesis
about the function of revelation in a
society
if these
drug-induced dream-like
states
of religious experience
are the fountain from which
a culture like the greek culture emerges
well what are we supposed to make of
that ontologically i mean we're great
admirers of the greeks right we we see
our culture as
certainly the rational element of it and
perhaps a tremendous amount of the
aesthetic element is deeply rooted in
greek presuppositions it's like well is
that are the hallucinian mysteries that
religious element is that an aberration
or is it is it that which in that within
which everything else is embedded this
is a this is a fundamentally important
question it's not something trivial i
really don't know what to make of it
because it throws the whole problem of
well the ontological significance of
psychedelic substances into the mix and
that's a thorny problem if there ever
was one and that's a problem of
the lower meeting the higher that's for
sure right these chemical substances
that can reliably induce overwhelming
mystical experiences
you can just set that aside and say well
that's a form of insanity but it's not
schizophrenia
it's it's not obviously within the
category of of mental illness and then
and to you know to
murder rescues hypothesis runs quite
contrary to that not only is it not
insanity it's
it was a vital source of of revelatory
knowledge philosophical knowledge and
and
got the ball rolling in some sense so
god only knows what to make of that but
well
there's i mean there's lots of
experimental work being done on this
right now the griffith lab
i i did an experiment in my lab right
it's not happy phenomenal the people who
have more mystical experiences have more
meaning in life
reliable correlation
but yeah they become more open yeah
they undergoes
yeah yeah well for a couple of years
anyways
and it's not trivial it's one
standardization increase it's a big
difference man you have all of yaden's
work showing that when people have these
experiences
[Music]
they will
reliably improve their
yeah well so so a good friend of mine
who's a genius by the way
and so i listen to what he has to say
and he's a technological genius
he talked to me about his his mushroom
experiences when he was a mixed-up
teenager you know engaging in various
forms of delinquent activity and he said
that
from the after his psychedelic
experience
his sense of what was right and was what
was wrong was massively heightened and
he
abided by it from then on yeah yeah and
like i look at his life it's like well
you know you you've accomplished a fair
bit and he's a very solid person and
quite the monster in in the most
positive way and
you know you can't just just dispense
with that it's like well it taught him
the difference between good and evil and
then he abided by that for the course of
his life and and you know when when
griffis griffith's people have his
laboratory subjects have these mystical
experiences and they quit smoking yeah
and you think
and
if you take a look at this work you'll
see like it's
so it's onto a normativity people
encounter what they call the really real
um and it's really unusual because
normally what we do is we take these
experiences that are disconnected from
our everyday intelligibility like a
dream and we say it's not real because
it doesn't fit in
people do the opposite with these
experiences they say that was really
real and all of this has to change to
get closer to it now i think there's a
way though of starting i'm not this
isn't going to be a complete answer
jordan but
i think part of the what reason why we
find it problematic these kinds of
experiences and this is what some of the
empirical work
i did showed is because we've reduced
rationality to inference
and we've forgotten that rationality is
broader and includes insight and if you
think of how an insight works and you
can see you can see continuing between
insight flow
transformative experience even the flow
experience has mystical aspects to it
and people get into it on a fairly
reliable basis
right and what we have what we have to
say is the core of rationality is not
inferential coherence it's the capacity
for self-correction and insight is one
of our most powerful ways of
self-correcting i point to your own work
you showed in some of your experiments
that you know one of the things that
predicts insight is the anomalous card
sorting task right and you also showed
that that predicts how well people are
are are overcoming self-deception you
did the experiments on both of those
right and that's not a coincidence
insight is one of the fundamental
machineries by which we overcome how
we've fundamentally misframed it's a
fundamental self-correction we need a
model of rationality that includes them
both
let me ask you about that let's go back
to this nested
idea right can i just say something
about psychedelics please do it is
important to mention
is that i mean obviously a lot of people
are talking about it right now and i did
you know i did watch that interview with
rescue and i think that in this question
of psychedelics i think we're actually
seeing an
an increase of the problem that we're
talking about this kind of alienating
problem which is that psychedelic seems
like a very nice solution because there
it is there's the mushroom i can analyze
the chemical substance i can i can so
when we talk about the eleusinian
mysteries now everybody's excited to
talk about the spiked wine but no one
cares to talk about the entire ritual in
which this was embedded and it becomes
this kind of weird reductive thing in
which the tool that we can identify
which is you know you can you can put it
in a box and you can you can nicely
identify it then everybody's attention
goes there right now because of our kind
of materialism in our in art
and so i find it very difficult because
you know what what we saw psychedelics
do in the 60s is that ripping open the
veil supposedly in a world where the
ritual around let's say the coherence of
society the place where society coheres
together and engages in a common ritual
and in common attention and in common
storytelling and then we kind of throw
this stuff out into a world that is
individualistic and based on on
everybody's own little whims is not
necessary is going to i i think and we
saw it happen is going to create these
experiences that are frameless
and instead of binding we'll we'll we'll
continue to kind of fragment our society
i'm really worried about the
psychedelics
yeah can i just jump in and i'm sort of
thinking out loud because i
you know i really loved in what both
jordan and john were saying is the the
way the mystical is being described
there's something really right in that i
think when you have a true mystical
experience meaning an experience of of
god of the sacred it does have those
effects that it convinces you that's
really real as opposed to the world
that's it's real but it's not as real as
that that now i'm clearer about good and
evil
i mean the authentically mystical i
think has that but but
when you talk about drugs and all that
look for me it's a closed book i've
never experienced that myself directly
but i don't say this the great mystics
in the western tradition think of john
of the cross especially he was my go-to
guy
jonathan cross probably had
what we call extraordinary experiences
certainly his colleague teresa of avila
did i mean visions and that sort of
thing but what did johnny cross
consistently say let go of them
let go of them when people said what do
i do when i have an experience see it
it's kind of a buddhist thing see it and
let go of it john of the cross never
wanted people like hanging on to the
extraordinary vision or the
extraordinary
manifestation
so
there is the mystical for sure and you
know i use my
platonic thing going from uh you know
the cave going from physics to
mathematics to metaphysics but beyond
metaphysics there is indeed this
mystical dimension of knowing so i don't
discount that for a minute but i'm also
i've got a lot of john across in me that
says be very wary of hanging on to those
and to jonathan's point there about you
know well if i just take this drug
that's going to be my my guaranteed path
into the mystical
whatever is going on there
the real mystical you know tonight i'll
be probably in front of the blessed
sacrament at some point with uh the
rosary
and
believe me i'm not having any kind of
lsd like experiences but that's the
mystical as far as i'm concerned um so
i'm trying to find what's really good in
that description of it which i think it
really is accurate but i'm wary of
clinging to it there's one thing to be
clear go ahead mr responded to
jonathan's criticism i mean the point
that jonathan is making is being
recognized by people in the field first
of all there's a there's a distinction
even in griffith between a psychedelic
experience and a mystical experience and
secondly okay most people are clearly
indicating for example all the
therapeutic interventions using
psychedelic and the evidence is mounting
that it's not the drug that doesn't
right it is the drug in
in concert with the set and setting the
therapeutic framework all of this other
stuff has you have to and i consistently
argue for this you have to have this
wrapped in a sapiential framework
because it is it can just as much take
you off into self-deception as it can
into right into self-correction so i i
bet but i want to be clear that there's
a lot of people that take the criticisms
that have been made here very seriously
and it's actually woven into a lot of
the research
yeah well it's interesting with regards
to the scientism issue so if you look at
griffith's research so you you see that
his subjects take psilocybin and then
they have a mystical experience and then
they quit smoking or they're less afraid
of death it's like and the way it's
written up in the journal is it is
bottom-up drug effect because there's no
description of the content of the
mystical experience it's like well the
drug produces a mystical experience and
then people don't smoke and and the
scientific journal format only allows
for that
and so but then there's this question
that's like this is a big question it's
like okay well why are these people no
longer afraid of death like did that
switch just get turned off well that's
not that's not how it works there the
whole view they have of reality has been
reoriented in some manner and what
manner it's like well what happened
exactly that's that's an even more key
question and it's relevant to jonathan's
point and then john to go after your you
a little bit on this topic jonathan is
pointing to something that's
that's that's a very intelligent caution
and that is that i know you know that i
know you know that and these
these hypotheses of set and setting are
they're just the beginning of that
surround that needs to be created to
integrate these experiences into the
broader culture they're just
they're you know they're not much
changed from the early 60s well you have
to be somewhere calm you have to be with
someone who you know is going to take
care of you it's like
yeah that's we're just barely beginning
to to figure out what to do with this
and then bishop baron
i i believe for what it's worth and i
don't know what you guys think about
that i think that revelation
is a psychedelic account
literally oh the book of revelation i
really believe that you bet you bet i
think that the author of that had a
psychedelic experience and all he did
was write down what happened to him no
it's not that might not be right but
it's too grounded in the old testament
right the classic apocalyptic literature
i mean
why is that why is that why is that an
objection why is that an objection he
was grounded in that tradition and all
of that tradition was was made vivid in
imagery during the experience that's not
be not certainly not beyond the
the confines of such experiences
so and i think the church is going to
have to wrestle with this seriously in
the years to come because there's an
association between psychedelic use and
revelatory
meaning
that the church is going to have to
grapple with i believe there are plenty
of monkeys those are
and have all these types of experiences
but that don't take psychedelics they
you know it that it it's actually
through asceticism and through
transformation and i think this is
coming back to bishop baron's point is
that
let's say in the hessy catholic
tradition in the mystical tradition of
the east it's exactly like what he said
about sin john of the cross they
consistently insist that the mystic has
to ignore all experiences because the
purpose is not to have experiences the
purpose is to be united with god to be
transformed you know to be free of your
passions to be free of the things that
kind of bind you and it's gonna happen
and maybe that can actually maybe be
somewhat instructive for others but
that's not the point and so
so i think that i i can i understand it
because there's something about our
world too that wants experiences right
we we can we want to have these
these
exciting or very kind of uh exciting
experiences but the real purpose is to
be transformed which is why someone is
willing to be martyred or someone is
like that has nothing to do with like
having a really great mystical
experiences there's something about
it really is about the transformation of
the of the person into into the image of
christ let's say
jonathan is it true i'm curious in the
eastern traditions i don't know as well
but in in the west certainly the mystics
all talk about
god actively stripping these things away
so even something like the great
contentment i get in the beginning of my
relationship with god my sense of
consolation to use ignatius term uh god
will take that away because i'm not
meant to fall in love with the
consolation i meant to fall in love with
god
so i'm not meant to fall in love with
the mystical experience or with the
vision or whatever i meant to fall in
love with god and so god actively
john the cross will talk about the you
know the dark night of the soul and
that's really what he means it's not a
psychological state it's it's god
actively taking away
these experiences because there's
something else that we're really talking
about
in in the eastern tradition the highest
point is is absence of all image and
thought right yeah that that you you
actually don't have any there's no
imagination there's no thought there's
nothing there's only this kind of pure
presence and this pure light let's say
that kind of
gathers you into god uh so it is the and
they constantly say the same thing they
say all these experiences let them go
you gotta drop them you gotta don't
become a guru and you know kind of teach
out of your out of your little mystical
insight but rather just drop it and keep
going up the ladder let's say well right
i mean i'm very wary of the idea that
like the communion cup the the origins
are in some kind of psychedelic
experience i mean trust me it's never
happened to me i've been going to mass
since i was a kid uh because
the reality of it is other than that i
mean even if there was something and
certainly the eleusinian mysteries have
been well studied and perhaps there was
uh a psychedelic element and so on but i
would never want to put stress on that
i would i would want to say that first
of all if you talk i talked to aiden
lyon who was right his book is coming
out a psychedelic experience of
philosophy of psychedelic experience
first of all he doesn't uh he doesn't
pin the term on the use of psychedelics
per se it just means mind revealing
experience
okay and so
what i would say is that the substances
are belong to a class that don't require
chemical substances
so
these are disruptive strategies you know
jonathan mentioned you know aesthesis
right asceticism yeah the shamans
chanting the drumming the sleep
deprivation there's a whole family of
disruptive strategies but
let me let me try and show you what i
think this is related to if you are if
you are trying to if you're having a
problem like a problem because you've
missed framed the situation and you need
an insight
what's actually really good for an
insight is to be moderately distracted
from the problem
or it's like if you're trying to solve
an insight problem on the computer
screen and i put a bit of static or
noise into it that will actually help
you break up the inappropriate frame and
find a new frame you do the same thing
with neural networks neural networks are
trying to learn and you periodically
have to throw in noise because if you
don't throw in noise they'll get too
narrow and too fixed on what they're
picking up on so this is this is and
this is what i meant but i did a talk
about this it's like
insight requires these disruptive
strategies and they look exactly the
opposite from our model of rationality
so i think a more appropriate thing
because i mean i i see disruptive
strategies in saint john of the cross i
certainly see those
and of course they're all the way
through the neoplatonic tradition um and
they can be cognitive disruptive
strategies nicholas of kuza puts you
like you know that an infinite circle is
also a straight line and you go music
like that right so i i i'm with you on
that
no i'm with you on that i'm thinking of
thomas merton used the buddhist term
calming the monkey mind and he thought
that was the purpose of the rosary yeah
and i was conducting a retreat that's
about three years ago with the priests
of dublin now i'm all irish so this is
in my cultural dna but they were praying
the rosary one night there's about 60
men
and they prayed the rosary which
normally takes about 25 minutes to do it
at the usual pace they finished it in
about six minutes and it was hailey
mayfield
hail mary from the great source hey but
at first it seemed ludicrous but what it
was doing was setting up just that kind
of buzz
that sort of mantra-like quality that i
think does allow something to happen
that allow something to happen in deeper
parts of the psyche deeper parts of the
soul so i think that's right i agree
with those elements are there in the
mystical tradition the jesus prayer too
jonathan's an example of that i think
yeah
and so i for me
as a scientist i'm studying these things
like when i did the the one experiment i
mentioned the content which i think is
supportive of jonathan's point isn't the
key thing that's predictive of the
changes in people it's predictive of the
relationship to meaning in life it's
actually the insight process rather than
the particular phenomenological content
that seems to be driving the
transformation
the christian ascetic and the christian
mystic
this
insight gathering or this kind of
mounting up into insight is
bound up in
the transformation of the person in
terms of their own passions and also the
transformation of the community in terms
of
liturgy and participation in communion
and so it's buffered like it like i said
it's binding it doesn't it's not just
someone you know doing something to get
some insight but it ends up being this
this binding of the of like if bishop
baron was talking about all these monks
sitting together doing the rosary
together and then maybe going into
liturgy and and taking communion
together and working together and so
there's something more than just the
just the kind of
psychological or you know personal
experience or personal healing from from
this or that problem but it's yeah it's
it's it's a holistic thing i hate using
that word but it's a holistic process
let's say
because both ways right the insight
isn't just propositional it's
perspectival
and procedural and and i think mystical
experience is the most profound version
of participatory knowing i mean i think
and yeah they could make a very strong
neoplatonic argument and and i think i
agree with you jonathan i think i mean
you you see this in some of the things
i've been doing the ethnographic work on
where people do the circling you you you
can you can get uh you can get shared
insight flow that doesn't belong to any
one person it belongs to the community
as a whole and people right and and and
i think that's that's very important uh
for as you said making sure that this
doesn't i mean it's so easy for these
experiences to become a magnet of
narcissism for people right and so
the de-centering that happens when we
are immersed in something larger than
ourselves which i think
helps cultivate the virtue of reverence
i absolutely agree with you i think that
absolutely has to be the case i i've
argued repeatedly for that i hope i'm
not coming across as trying to say it's
a it's an individual personal thing that
i'm talking about that's not
fundamentally what i'm talking about i'm
talking about it being systemic in the
individual and systematic throughout the
community
so okay so let me jonathan i'm curious
about this i mean i your cautions are
duly noted on my end i i saw see what
happened say in retrospect when
the hallucinogens were introduced to
western culture right i mean
it didn't work very well
and
look at what happened to timothy leary
so
for example
i had his old job at harvard by the way
oh i didn't know that yeah
yes many people have pointed that out to
me jordan by the way
jesus of all the weird things and
in any case you know merce eleata also
believed that the true shamanic
tradition wasn't psychedelic driven
no and now that was an aberration i
think he was wrong i really do believe
that he was wrong
and i think that and i i'm
i'm also not entirely convinced that
that the practices that you're
describing can produce experiences that
are as intense as those that are
produced chemically maybe they are but
even if they are they're not ex they're
not
available to the typical person
they take tremendous amount of training
and then so that's a big problem and
then is that a problem or is that a
feature well it seems like well i don't
i don't
yeah look it's a feature too jonathan
because maybe you need to do all that
training to handle the insight you know
and and i'm not trying to look for a
facile solution here believe me um but
the church has a hard time attracting
people at the moment
and
i don't know what's happening in in the
broad church with regards to the sort of
work for example that griffiths is doing
and it's not like i have the answers to
these things but
i
by
we shouldn't look to the psychedelics as
a savior certainly but they should also
not be discounted because they are the
means by which people can
have the sorts of experiences that the
scientists
the followers of scientism discount
it's right there it's right there as
proof in some sense
i'd be more maybe that's irrelevant to
the choosing the wisdom tradition jordan
as you've been doing i mean the fact
that you're drawing a lot of people back
toward christianity through the opening
up of the bible and the the wisdom way
of reading the bible that to me is a
great way the churches can start drawing
especially young people back it's
obviously working
in your case
you know we've got our problems and some
of it came from the scandals certainly
but some came from an exaggerated
attempt to be relevant to the society
and to sort of dumb down our language
and to make it sound like an echo of the
culture that's what did us in i think in
terms of attracting younger people but
what you're doing opening up the the
scriptures that's what the church
fathers did and people are flocking to
that because they they find in that the
wisdom tradition and through the wisdom
tradition they they're finding mysticism
authentic mysticism and contact with god
so i think that's the route to go it's
we have to deal with our moral issues we
have to deal with the scandals that's
for sure and we have to deal though with
this dumbing down of the faith and this
flattening out of the faith uh that's i
think what what has uh really
compromised our mission
did i pick up on that do you see any
yeah sorry go ahead john because uh like
i think this is part
first of all i wanna i wanna challenge
two things you said jordan um i've had
both experiences and uh i i i've had
peak versions of both and i can't find
them ultimately distinguishable like
through a contemplative practice and
taking a psychedelic um they have and
when you look at the look of the
research people say they can be the same
they tend to orient a little bit
differently
the psychedelic experience the
psychedelic mystical experience tends to
on average be a little bit more
impersonal the contemplative one tends
to be a little bit on average more
personal in the ontology uh but no deep
you know differences and the other thing
i would say is
you know i don't know how much we have
to rely on them i i take your point that
it's instructive and i think the science
should do it i i think it's
immoral to not investigate these
substances because of the clear evidence
that's mounting for their ability to
alleviate
you know untreatable addiction
depression uh uh a host of issues and so
i i think we should keep doing the
science i'm not
but
you know the research
sort of reliably indicates that 30 to 40
percent of the population have these
transformative experiences that's what
taylor says i think the problem is not
an absence of the experience to go to
bishops baron's point i think it's the
absence of a wisdom framework that
allows people to pro properly
appropriate and metabolize these
experiences so i i'll do this with in my
class i think i mentioned this to you
jordan but my students will say where to
go for information the internet blah
blah blah blah where do you go from
knowledge science maybe the university
and i'll say where do you go for wisdom
and there's a deafening silence
right and wisdom is not optional you
can't you well you know what i don't
care about being connected and
overcoming self-deception and harming
other people because of the ways in
which i'm willfully i of course you can
it's not optional wisdom is a necessity
it's it's an absolute prerequisite to
religion
yet our culture right has no
no way in general of providing people
with the sapiential framework to process
these experience and also to have
properly cultivated a prepared character
for them when they do emerge so i would
argue that that that's where the the
problem lies it's not in the absence
i think of these experience for people
it's the absence of a framework that
allows a world view that allows people
to properly process them
and we've had a few centuries of
christianity really
kind of falling into the trap of of
materialism first of all trying to
constantly justify its stories through
history and some statuette found in
palestine or whatever like all these
strategies to try to constantly
justify the stories through
these scientific methods
and at the same time focusing on the
idea of being saved or going to hell and
going to heaven rather than the more
mystical tradition which is there it's
all there right it's all there and it's
all available to us it's just that the
emphasis has been i think the wrong one
in the past few centuries but it is
possible and i think it's happening now
and like like bishop baron said i think
jordan one of the things you are
forcing a lot of christians to do is to
reconsider what this has to do with my
life how it binds it together how it
connects us together and we have the
church fathers that that just right
there it's all there in in their in
their teaching and it's there in the
liturgy itself and the imagistic vision
of the chants and the the iconography
and all of this is it's all present we
just need to kind of
go back and help people connect things
together so that they can have true
experiences but we forgot a lot of our
own tradition or we underplayed it i'll
give you one example when i was coming
of age in the catholic church so you're
now late 70s into the 80s the way we
were instructed in the bible so those of
us preparing for the priesthood right to
be preachers and to be spiritual
counselors and soul doctors it was pure
historical criticism that was a method
of biblical approach that emphasized
very much you know what was in the mind
of the human author as he wrote and so
using
very rationalistic methods to kind of
break the scriptures down break them
apart but the whole idea of meaning
about what the scriptures were telling
us about god about our relation to god
the mystical dimension of life that was
all very muted as a result our preaching
and i accuse you know my own generation
of this our preaching became very flat
often very politicized um maybe
psychologized in in the worst sense of
that term um
but the the mystical depth of the
scripture we forgot we didn't read the
church fathers as they
jung himself said the first
psychologists were the church fathers
it's dead right it seems to me um so we
do
we
share a lot of this blame here by we i
mean the religions themselves we forgot
our own best traditions and we allowed
this scientism to hold sway and that's
why people are struggling
so i've been trying to figure out
i mean i really don't know how to i'm
stunned at the
the popularity of the biblical lectures
i can't wrap my head around it you know
what no matter how hard i try
um
and i can't i can't even judge their
significance
so
small or great
but they've attracted a lot of views so
we'll stick with that
so then
assuming that they have some
significance i've tried to figure out
well what was it that made them work
why why did people come and listen to
what i was saying about the
though about genesis
and i think partly it was because i
wasn't exactly telling people what i
thought about them i wasn't saying this
is how you should read these stories
i was trying to investigate something i
knew was beyond my comprehension
and i was doing that
on my feet now i talked to someone this
week who is quite explicitly religious
and i can hardly listen to him because
he kept telling me what was right
he kept telling me the dogma it's like
well for are you so sure you know that
and like who the hell are you to tell me
that and that and it just there was just
no meaning being revealed from that
there was no investigation like i
approached the bible as a psychologist
in some sense but as if it was something
i really didn't understand a strange
artifact
god only knows what it is it's this book
that's been around forever cobbled
itself together
in a manner we can't understand it's
lasted for a very very long period of
time it's had an inestimable impact
it's full of extraordinarily strange
stories
that
that we understand very little about in
some profound sense and it was an
investigation and i kind of pulled
people along with me during the
investigation and that that seemed to
and maybe when i when i go to church do
i see
do i see that do i feel that i'm being
led along an investigation into the
structure of deep meaning
and the answer is not usually i usually
feel as if i'm being told what to think
or told what to believe and that's just
that doesn't seem to work it's
but the church father's priesthood is
exactly the way you're describing and we
we luckily have some of these sermons
like of augustine that he gave we'd say
off the cuff there was a secretary out
the crowd who take them down he would
probably polish them later but you get a
sense of someone
who's doing what you're saying i think
thinking through with the text as he
goes
he was theologizing philosophizing but
he was he was trying to draw his people
he was a pastor augustine he wasn't an
academic he wasn't a professor of
theology at a university he was a pastor
trying to draw his people closer to god
and he learned the method by the way
from ambrose when he goes to ambrose in
milan he's a he's a maniche he's not
even a christian but he heard that
ambrose was a great rhetorician so he
went to hear his rhetoric and while he
was there he learned the method of
reading the bible which is this more
allegorical spiritual method
that's what jung appreciated that's what
you're doing in many ways the young
augustine learned it from ambrose and
then he bequeathed that to us in his
sermons and biblical commentaries but
trust me when i tell you we didn't study
that we didn't study that approach ours
was a very scientific rationalistic
approach to the bible and that's why
preaching is relatively bad i would say
so you've
in a way stumbled on something that's
very old
you know but still has enormous power to
transform people
there's also something important jordan
in understanding that at least that the
traditional churches at least the
liturgical churches that
you don't you don't them like for
example in the orthodox church they
always say if the sermon is more than 15
minutes it's pride
it's like keep your sermons as short as
possible because you're not there to
encounter
obviously
obviously guilty of that you're not
you're not there i mean it's
propositional understanding is fine but
it's participatory like church is
participatory so you enter into the
church you say like you imagine an
orthodox church even a traditional
catholic church you have a space which
is structured as the hierarchy
ontological hierarchy of being and then
you see these images which are patterned
and are revealing to you these mysteries
that are beyond words and then you
participate in the singing these
processions and it is it is a
participative thing and so if you go
there to kind of
get knowledge
it's not the same type of of practice
and as you're singing these songs and as
you're hearing these hymns all of a
sudden two images connect together and
all of a sudden you know these things
start to connect inside you in somewhat
in almost a kind of
super rational way and the insights you
get sometimes your heart you have
difficulty explaining them but they're
very deep and they're they're embodied
as you bow down as you kneel as you eat
the body and and and blood of christ
these are these are different types of
participation than just and jonathan
i'm totally in agreement with you and
what did we do in our catholic churches
in the west the same time we were
presenting the bible in this in this
flattened out historical critical way we
also were flattening out our churches
emptying out our churches of just that
mystical cosmic symbolism the angels the
saints color uh the cosmic dimension and
we flatten them out and we made them
like you know
empty meeting spaces so there was a
terrible rationalism that descended upon
the church and it dried us up in many
ways
um you know so i this is again my maya
culpa as a catholic i think we passed
through a period that was really
problematic
and and recovering the sources you know
simone we say right we're covering the
the great sources of the bible
and the fathers that's what that's what
we're talking about
what the bible had by its nature what
the fathers understood
that's what we need to revive the church
i think
so look but bishop you're doing
something right obviously you're
attracting
some online attention some substantial
online attention and jonathan the same
is true of you and well john it goes
without saying for you to some degree
because you're a professor and you have
that whole you know that whole world at
your fingertips in some sense and you've
been very successful at that but in the
more specifically religious domain the
more specifically christian domain you
two are having some some public success
what are you doing right do you think
i'll let jonathan go first i actually i
think you know i think bishop baron and
i are are doing very similar things
which is why i've always felt akin to
what he's doing i've written for his for
one of his publications i always felt
we're close in the approach which is
first of all a
avoiding just argumentation but i would
rather this kind of presentation of
beauty uh you know bishop baron also
even in his publications is this desire
to kind of have a beauty first approach
this kind of encounter with these
powerful patterns of being and you know
how they kind of point to christ and i
think that
showing the deep coherence the deep
narrative coherence in in scripture and
then pointing back out to the world and
saying this deep coherence in scripture
you're going to encounter it in movies
and in all these cultural phenomena that
you're going to see you're going to
encounter the same deep patterns that
you find in scripture at a lower level
we could say but that all of these kind
of culminate into and so it really is
like a meaning first approach and a
beauty first approach i think which is
which is which is attracting people
because the insights they get at first
they can't i have people who watch my
videos for two years and tell me they
don't understand what i'm saying and i'm
like why are you watching my how can you
been watching my videos for two years if
you don't understand and they seem to
express that they get these insights and
they can't totally explain them
and and then it keeps them kind of
wanting to to continue on in in on this
path let's say towards ultimately a lot
of them end up moving towards
christianity and entering a church at
some point
yeah my thing has been beauty and truth
i mean so don't dumb it down i lived
through dumbed-down catholicism and it
was a pastoral disaster you look at all
the surveys i studied them very
carefully why young people are leaving
the scandals come up the scandals will
be mentioned but by far
the most prominent reason is i don't
believe the doctrines i never had my
questions answered uh it's in conflict
with science it doesn't make sense
they're intellectual problems well
yeah i get it we dumbed the project down
for about 50 years
uh so smarten it up and and reintroduce
people to
this tradition we've been talking about
the second thing is the beautiful we
also as we dumbed it down we also
uglified it you know
we we uh
de-emphasize the beautiful so one
example you know we put out this word on
fire bible so the text of the of the
gospels but it's a bit like an
illuminated manuscript idea that we
surrounded it with glosses from the
fathers and the popes and the great
theologians but also lots of artwork
lots of color so i want to reintroduce
people to the bible but not in a flat
rationalistic way you know so that's
what i've been trying to do
well i was certainly attracted to
jonathan to begin with because of the
quality of his artistic endeavor right
this absolute these absolutely beautiful
and archaic yeah
traditional let's say not archaic
traditional this traditional uh medium
that he was revitalizing and in such a
stunningly beautiful way and
that's that was the entry point into
getting to know him and getting to
understand his thought and yeah and
beauty isn't
the thing you can't argue against today
beauty just smacks you and
and and that's really something so and
you can also help people notice that
it's like well notice
beauty book beauty brooks no
argumentation right what do you think
that signifies what's it pointing to is
it pointing to something higher it
certainly seems to what might be higher
we need to figure that out well it's the
least threatening of the transcendentals
in the post-modern context so people
today you say here's something that's
true who are you gonna tell me what's
true i got my own truth even worse
here's the way you ought to live here's
the good who are you to tell me how to
live but the beautiful doesn't preach in
that negative sense it it just is you
know it shows itself so it's more
winsome i think it's it's a more it's a
less threatening way into the project so
that's why i've tried to lead with it
especially in a world that's ugly like
our world is just so ugly
modern the modern world is just so banal
that
you know there's a reason why tourists
go to cities and visit churches even
though they're not christian and they
don't care about it because they go
someplace and they're looking for a
beautiful beauty and then they end up in
a church rather than in a mall
yeah that's definitely worth thinking
about you know and the intent incredible
value that's to be found in those
unbelievably beautiful constructions
it's like what is that beauty and why do
we experience it there those those
lattice-like creations of stone and
crystal with color and the addition of
the music that all goes to your
liturgical point the drama that's part
of that
and and
and the celebration of beauty which is
definitely absent in the modern culture
yes yeah when i was a student in paris
i'd go there all the time and
chart to me is the most beautiful
covered space in the world
uh but i remember this years ago i
brought a classmate of mine so a priest
from chicago
to see shart and we walked through and i
explained everything we looked at the
windows and all this
and he said gosh it's something
it's just too bad it's so liturgically
off
and i knew what he meant because i was
formed in the same way you know that you
know the church would be in the round so
we could see each other and there should
be clear sight lines and you know should
be brightly lit and all this stuff and
like i mean you just said shard
cathedral is liturgically off it's like
it's the supreme liturgical space in the
world but that shows that the quality of
the bad quality of the formation that we
got in my generation
um my experience with christianity has
been
different
um
and
so i was brought up in a fundamentalist
christian
family at family
and so
[Music]
i very much um was traumatized by that
and
um i think if you talk to some of the
nuns no nes's uh i think there's a
mixture like you said i don't think the
scandals which the media likes to focus
on are not the primary factors right not
what the research shows one is this
issue about intelligibility and i want
to talk about that and the other is
there i i meet
a lot of people are attracted to my work
they because they've had similar
histories uh not just specific to
christianity i'm not beating up on
christianity i've had people coming out
of other traditions islamic buddhist
this is possible um in all of uh uh the
truth of all of the traditions i've
encountered um
so
i i think uh what there's two things i
want to say and they're not intended to
be pushback but they're intended to open
up questions which is uh and this is
before jonathan and i also uh
we rub up against each other but it
usually creates a good friction and good
sparks um
and and maybe uh uh
it'll call forth a response for you too
bishop
um i think the project is not to try and
resurrect
um uh neoplatonism or the neoplatonic
structure uh i mean
aquinas uh sorry augustine wasn't only
uh you know taught by ambrose he
explicitly talked about you know
plutonius and the platonous and the
mystical experience the neoplatonic
mystical experience he had and how
important that was et cetera
and it's clear that it's through pseudo
dionysius and maximus and so i like
and so i think the project if i were to
put it if we wanted to reach the nuns
is to show them a reconciliation a
profound one
and he here my ambition runs not
personally but the ambition of the
project
towards aquinas or maximus which is to
show
right to revise that neoplatonism and
perhaps it's a neoplatonic christianity
but i'm not going to be specific about
that right now
to show how it is profoundly uh you know
to do a reciprocal reconstruction
between the neoplatonism and the
scientific worldview and there's a lot
of people doing that right now i think
we need we need a post-nominalist
neoplatonism if i could put it that way
in a profound shape john you
you opened that that
uh
salvo
with the statement that you were
traumatized by the fundamentalist
christians yes very much and that that's
that's not irrelevant to the salvo
and and and to the nature of your
project and and it's something we should
discuss too
because you also brought up the idea of
reconciliation it's
so people have left the church but in
some sense the church has alienated
people from it as well and some of
that's the scandal and some of it's the
sort of experience that you described
yes
people have been left with the with the
horrors of childhood experience that
were a consequence of their religious
education and
i'm not trying believe me i'm not trying
to
attack the institutions per se but
but
it's something that they need to deal
with that needs to be dealt with that
all of us need to deal with
not they there's no they here you know
what i there's no they here we have
these problems we have this meaning
crisis it's everyone's problem
so it's there's no they in some sense
but
but so what has that done to you let's
say with regards to your appreciation of
christianity per se well first of all i
want to say that those two things that
were talked about the one that bishop
baron brought up about
and my response to it is i think we need
and maybe jonathan will have a response
because he has this model of
christianity going through a
resurrection cycle itself so maybe there
is a possibility for our discussion here
but i think we need to i think we need a
reciprocal reconstruction we need a
post-nominalist uh form of neoplatonism
that will provide that bridging and i do
not think jordan
that the lack of that is unrelated to
the trauma that i experienced
except because of there was no bridge
take that apart exactly okay because
there was no bridge it was easy to give
me an either or isolating choice you're
either in this world view or you're in
that world view and that one's demonic
and if you go over there you're lost
there is a deep connection between the
lack of bridge between the religious
worldview if i can put it that way and
the scientific worldview that allowed
for that kind of tyranny over my mind
that i found so deeply traumatizing
those are not separable phenomena that's
what i'm arguing they are deeply
interpenetrating and mutually supporting
that's how i experienced it and what
opened me up was a science fiction book
that showed it was a book by rodgers
alaska the lord of light that showed the
possibility of wonder and self
transcendence within a scientific world
view that's what blew me open out of
fundamentalism
yeah well lots of people who are
followers or scientists let's say find
their religion inside totally totally
that's where literature grabs them right
that's that's where they're grabbed by
the religious and i mean star wars is
the classic example of that for sure
definitely so
and that's you know that's worth
pointing out to these these rationalist
atheists that's fascinating to me
when i deal with atheists online which i
do a lot um
very often i say when you scratch the
surface of a really angry atheist
you'll find as you put a traumatized
fundamentalist at first that surprised
me now it doesn't anymore that when i
press a little bit and probe a little
bit is someone recovering from just the
kind of traumatizing experience that you
had as a kid so that makes sense to me
yeah i i want to be clear i i wouldn't
self-identify as an atheist uh that
would be no no i wasn't just in that no
but but i think just to your point that
i understand that the severe reaction to
it that people would have did you what
did you think of the point that i made
that there's a deep connection between
sort of the the the psychological trauma
and the fact that it was facilitated by
this gap
uh
right religion and science
that is pretty much the enlightenment
grammar that we've been given right and
and
you see what i find attractive about the
neoplatonic tradition was the idea of
rationality and the mystical being
deeply interpenetrating but we can't
leave it
as it was is what i well
i think we it needs a fundamental
uh reorganize but but
and it needs to connect to this fund
there's a there's a huge thing happening
in science at least the science that i
uh
where the fundamental ontology is coming
into question
the way we have seen since the beginning
of the 20th century there's a golden
opportunity here there's a gold and on
what do you see happening i mean what
are you what are you seeing
because you're far seeing so i want to
know like what is it that you're picking
up oh boy i don't know if i want to take
that
but thank you for that um well what i
see is this i see
i see that we are
there
we're moving back to
the the understanding uh that we need
the emanation with the emergence not
throwing out the emergence but we need
the emanation with it
for let me just give you one example
so when you in cognitive science even in
in biology
we are getting to the point and and and
you know aristotle would like this um
and maybe even more uh platinus
where we we understand possibility uh as
a real thing so for example
right
[Music]
and this this lines up with some eastern
traditions so i'll do this sometimes
i'll put a pencil on it on the table and
i'll roll it and this goes to like
cutting edge work by alicia araro and i
asked my students why did it roll and
they give this standard sort of
newtonian answer because you pushed it
all right and then i'll say think think
think what are you not seeing think
thinking what i said it also rolled
because there's a flat table
and there's open space in front of it
and it has the shape that it has there
are in addition to causal events there
are constraining conditions that are
just as real and they are as much
explanatory of how things operate as the
bottom-up causes so think of a tree you
have all of the events causing the
structure but the structure why does the
tree have the structure it has because
it increases the probability that a
photon will hit a chlorophyll
molecule it's structuring possibility
into potentiality and that's just as
much needed to explaining a tree as the
chemical events causing it we need both
to explain life to explain cognition and
more and more people like eastman's work
there's a lot of people from sort of the
white hedian philosophy of physics are
saying we need that even for our
fundamental physics because
we can't reconcile bottom-up quantum
mechanics with top-down relativity we
can't do it because we keep trying to
make it it's got to come from quantum up
to the relative the relativistic which
is you know top down but i would argue
the fact that we've tried this strategy
and we keep trying it for 40 years and
it's failing is probably a reason to
think that maybe we're we're framing the
problem with the wrong way and we have
to think about no no no we have to give
up a purely bottom up we have to make
the top down as real to all of our
explanations that's happening in the
science right now now to my mind and i
don't mean to be insulting because i
don't want to be reductionistic but that
sounds a lot like a lot of the language
i hear jonathan using and
i i i agree jonathan it's not identical
but you and i have good conversations
around this there's a we can talk to
each other there's a there's there's you
know a chance of real communication even
communing but that i don't think that's
specific to us i think that's a very
real possibility right here right now
there's an opening up of the space
that's happening now and and i think
people who are tuned to it can notice it
and it does have to do with what you're
saying in terms of
this kind of limit of science and the
problem of the observer and all of these
realities that everybody's trying to
deal with uh and it's like it's almost
like a zeitgeist and
it's interesting because
you're in experience you talked about of
being traumatized and then
having this separation of the two
worldviews it really is akin to the way
i was trying to describe at the outset
yeah the separation between let's say
the religious in a very in a very kind
of moralistic and legalistic and and uh
you know
materialistic way and this kind of rise
up above of these esoteric things that
kind of came up in the west whether it
goes into theosophy into all these
different very very popular you know all
the occultists all of this stuff was
very very popular we we tend to ignore
that but it was extremely uh had a lot
of effect on culture and so that's why
it's interesting because some people
today to me will say things like oh
you're you're saying occult things
because because i'm actually trying to
connect reconnect these things together
right to reconnect these things that
went up too high and these things that
went too low into this top-down bottom
up reality when you read sam max with
the confessor
you really do have exactly that
structure that you're talking about and
and i think that can if you read sangre
benissa and especially the mystical like
the more mystical fathers i think that
like you talked about pseudo-dionysus
there are some theologians right
interesting theology right now that are
positing
dionysus's theory as a solution to the
problem of complexity and emergence and
they don't want to come on my channel
yet because they're still working on
their papers but it's happening right
now like people are talking about it and
thinking about it yes
can i suggest something this comes from
cardinal george of chicago who was kind
of a mentor to me and he was a brilliant
guy and he used to say
we we start the religion science thing
the wrong way because it's too much a
polar opposition that we should work on
the recovery of philosophy
as a rational path and what i think he
meant was a lot of people especially
young people think the only rational
path is the scientific one
those are simply coterminous to be
rational is to be a follower of the
scientific method and so if religion
isn't that well then it must be
irrational
well if it introduced philosophy as
indeed a rational path that the most
brilliant people in the tradition have
have uh
have practiced it but it's not a
scientific path it's it's rational
without being scientific and that might
open the door cardinal george would say
to thinking about religion as also a
rational path that's not scientific
um i think it's hard for younger people
to even to imagine what that is
rational means scientific
we can help them out to some degree i
mean
i titled my first book maps
for a very specific reason
is that
this narrative structure
is a map
yeah
the this and that what that means if
that's true and i do believe it's true
and i studied a lot of the early work on
hippocampal function from animal animal
researchers and they they made some real
fundamental
uh discoveries in the field of cognition
it's like we we need a map to traverse
the world
it's not optional
without a map you're lost
and to be lost is is a terrible thing
and so and there's rationality in the
development of a map
there better be because otherwise it
doesn't get you to where you want to go
and you certainly want to get away from
being lost let's say
and science is not a map
it's a description of the terrain
without direction yeah there's direction
there i suppose but it's implicit the
scientists impose that direction by
following the dictates of their
intuition of meaning
but science itself doesn't offer a map
right well there's no rationality
outside of science okay well they let
the irrational people design the map
well that's what's happening with the
politicization of our culture right
right and so the religion and then the
rationalists you know they say well if
we weren't religious and we weren't
superstitious well everyone would be
rational wouldn't the world be a better
place and i think no the religious would
drop into the political
and then you watch what happens and we
are watching what happened because
there's no domain for the religious now
no specified domain so tiny things
become imbued with religious
significance because there's no proper
place right and that's a that's not good
and so
it's it's it's not that
it's not impossible i mean i i don't see
i don't see a flaw in this claim i can't
see a flaw in it's like don't we need a
map
well can science provide that map i've
never heard
a thoroughly
critical
scientifically trained deep philosopher
make the case that
science can provide the direction for
ethical behavior and that's the map
what's good where should we head
so well then what do we do with that
there's nothing there's nothing there's
no map no and that's why i objected so
much to that claim that that science
belongs in the highest place that the
physical sciences are the queen of the
sciences that can't be right because
that's that's saying the one that can't
provide the map is governing all the
other ways of knowing and that can't be
right but i think we have lost a sense
of that and again i think as a religious
person i'll take some responsibility i
think we have not been great at
providing the map
um and we have to recover that for sure
well bishop i i
i want i i think this follows from what
you and jordan were talking about one of
the problems about invoking philosophy
is is which one do you mean
do you mean academic philosophy or do
you mean the philosophy that pierre
hadeau i know has has brought back where
that one i think is better yeah the it's
a way of life well yes and what i would
what i what i would point to is
that that points us to a kind of why do
we what's the difference between the
academic philosophy and i have training
in that and philosophy as a way of life
and it goes to you know points that
jonathan was making
about you know the trend the the how
much the transformation
look the the cartesian claim is
that truths all truths are available to
a method
if you go to earlier you know the
neoplatonic tradition right there it's
like no no no there are some truths that
will only be disclosed if you go through
fundamental transformation
and then and so we have to talk about
the
the rationality of transformation which
is about you know the procedural the
perspectival the participatory
transformation and the thing about this
and this is what's really exciting is a
lot of the work is showing that you know
i've got a a
series that right with greg enriquez and
zach stein that
you you you can't infer your way through
transformation this goes to i mean the
person who wrote the book on this is l.a
paul i know laura h great philosopher
tight analytic argument to make the
point you can't infer your way through a
transformative process uh and so you
have to ask the question okay is it just
willy-nilly now what human beings
actually do what kind of rationality
agnes callard did this in her book on
aspiration she calls it proleptic
rationality what kind what is the
rationality what does it look like when
people are you know going through
fundamental transformations in order to
conform to reality that's their way of
getting at the truth rather than
marshaling a method and so as i go back
to my point again we need to expand the
notion of rationality and
the way it was exemplified in philo in
philia sophia rather than the way it is
exemplified i would say in uh uh still
to a large degree
academic philosophy i went into i agree
can i invoke the academic philosophers
have the same problem that bishop baron
described about the priesthood
yeah
that's how it looks could i invoke yours
to me your countrymen again uh lonergan
you know we had those four imperatives
if you want to know the world you've got
to be attentive be intelligent be
reasonable and be responsible and he
describes all four of those but his
point was we tend not to be those four
things the mind is fallen it falls away
from attention
it doesn't see what's there or even like
john to use your stuff it doesn't maybe
make the right um
siphoning moves to say let me be
attentive to the right things
it's not intelligent which for him meant
it doesn't have insights so it doesn't
discern uh intelligible form
it's not reasonable meaning it doesn't
make judgments so i i'm looking at a
phenomenon i say it could be this could
be this could be that but i never make
the judgment to say no that's that's
truly what this thing is and then
finally it's not responsible meaning it
doesn't follow up the implications of
its judgments
but what he was getting from his own
christian tradition i think was the deep
sense of the fallenness of the mind the
mind is
it's it's not it's not a wreck but it's
compromised and it needs to go through a
disciplinary process
it has to go and that's i think with
pierre aldo and those people are
recovering from the ancient world is you
had to go through plato's academy was
not a classroom where you would sit and
take in place plato's theory of the
forms it was a way of life
and you learned a
manner of of being and and knowing and
so on
so i think that's true in in any
intellectual discipline you've got to be
converted
and you have to acknowledge and we have
to acknowledge your sin in a way that
your mind is is not what it should be
and you got to go through a discipline
well gentlemen we've we've
we've passed our two hour mark
and so
um i think and i'm starting to drift
somewhat so
i'm going to call this to a halt i think
somewhat arbitrarily unless there are
pressing issues that any of you would
like to conclude with maybe a concluding
statement from each of you might be a
nice thing jonathan i put you on the
spot do you want to say something to
close up sure i mean i think that first
of all jordan thank you for the
opportunity for us to talk uh to speak
to each other i never met bishop baron i
i had some admiration for him and
obviously for you and for john and
i think that these discussions are very
fruitful and i think that these
especially as people watch them it's
because it's obviously not just
happening here if people watch them get
engaged and kind of people who haven't
listened to john's things or haven't
listened to bishop baron things are mine
you know to kind of see what is what is
the discussion happening now because a
lot of the things we brought up
are are really on fire in terms of
subjects in the world and so need to be
continuously explored and we need more
people to to dive in and so thanks for
the opportunity
john
i i i i want to reinforce what jonathan
just said uh it's been wonderful uh the
two hours flew by for me
it was wonderful to meet you bishop um
and i think we could have some wonderful
conversations in depth
about um you know the project of
perhaps uh integrating neoplatonism and
uh science i think lonergrin would be
help and you know insight of course was
crucial to that so i i really appreciate
all that um yeah i just wanted to say
that um
i take the meeting crisis very seriously
um and i think covet has made it worse
i've got a lot of evidence for that
and um
i don't think i think the the v i think
it's a vain hope that everything's just
going to go back to the way it was i
think that is not
where we should place our existential or
epistemic bets
and i think we need to ramp up the
project
of
getting
the call to a sapiential framework and a
way of life to people out there so
that's what would be my final word
bishop yeah mine again is just to thank
everybody i enjoyed it immensely and i
agree with john the time flew by and i
found it fascinating um yeah the
recovery of the wisdom tradition over
and against this deadening scientism
the recovery of value over and against
this equally deadening culture of
self-invention that i just generate my
own values i think that i mean bores me
to death
no but it bores me to death and i think
it's killing people spiritually so the
recovery of the wisdom tradition
recovery of objective value culminating
speaking as a as a catholic bishop in uh
in god the supreme value that's the key
to meaning
well thanks very much guys for
participating in this i really
appreciate it and um
i'm sure will i hope i pray all of that
that we'll have a chance to converse
again and that people who are listening
are benefited by this and that
we do this immense technology that we
have at our fingertips so surprisingly
uh ethical justice
and help
help dispense whatever wisdom we've
managed to cobble together
to as many people as we possibly can
and invite them along
thanks
god bless you all thank you
[Music]
you